Since our mother’s death, such outbreaks of grief had been common with
my warm-hearted but impulsive brother. Our uncle’s letter, however,
produced a good effect upon his mind, by directing his thoughts to
the active, perhaps adventurous, life which seemed before us. But
unfortunately we had to wait six months before we could get a ship--a
loss of time that, as will be seen hereafter, materially influenced
our future. Taking into account this delay, the six months for the
coming of the letter, and a similar period for our outward voyage, it
will be seen that a year and a half elapsed between the penning of our
uncle’s invitation and our anchoring in the roadstead of Batavia. What
unexpected events, what misfortunes, may happen in eighteen months! and
they did happen.

Ominous, indeed, of misfortune was the night of our arrival in the
island. It was the latter end of October, the period of the monsoons.
My brother and I were well-nigh frightened to death, most assuredly we
never expected to reach the land, for the elements were at war. The sea
rose in mountainous heights; the horizon was spread with vast sheets of
livid flame; the thunder shook both heaven and earth; and the wind, as
it rushed inland in its fury, uprooted the largest trees, and toppled
down the huts of peasants and the warehouses of the merchants in the
lower town. It was a mercy, indeed, that even the great pier which
forms the harbor of Batavia should have escaped.

The hurricane, however, although terrible in its fury, was but of short
duration; for by daybreak we were enabled to moor the vessel alongside
the pier, and also to procure a messenger, whom my father at once
dispatched to advise his brother of our arrival.

“If that is Batavia, it is a queer, dirty hole,” said Martin, shrugging
his shoulders, as he stood gazing upon the bamboo huts of the poor
natives, the warehouses of the Dutch merchants, and the thousands of
bales of goods, covered with tarpaulin, which seemed to block up and
render the roadways impassable.

“Right, lad,” said the captain, who was standing near my brother; “it
_is_ a queer, dirty hole. Moreover, it is worse than it seems, for,
after sunset, the vapors and putrid exhalations, arising from the
decaying vegetable and animal matter in the marshes, where you see
yonder mangroves, render it poisonous to Americans.”